
## Data Structures & Algorithms - Lists, Arrays, Stacks and Heaps

"The first rule of data structures is: You do not confuse lists, arrays, stacks, and heaps. The second rule of data structures is: You do not confuse lists, arrays, stacks, and heaps."

---

### What are lists? 
- Straight forward - lists are a collection of items that can differ in type. For example we could have an integer and string combined into one collection and this could be termed a list

### What are arrays?
- Arrays are a collection of items that are all of the same type

### What are stacks?
- Stacks are a collection of items that operate on a last in first out basis (LIFO basis)
- A real world example of stacks is the undo option in Excel, Word or most other software tools available. i.e the last operation to be performed is removed first when the user taps to undo.

### What are heaps?
- Heaps are a binary tree based structure. 

You may ask yourself - 'What is the difference betweeen a heap a  binary tree?'
- A heap has order. 
- The term min based heap refers to when the child nodes are less than or equal to the parent node. 
- The term max based heap refers to the child nodes being greater than or equal to the parent node
- Although heaps are sometime referred to as complete binary trees - because all levels of the treee are populated - nodes can have more than two chilren and therefore would not be defined as a strict binary tree.
  - In instances like this we can refer to the heaps as 'd-ary heap' - ternary heap (3 nodes), quaretnery heaps (4 nodes). By increasing the number of child nodes we can decrease the the height of the tree and therefore increase the speed.
  - That being said, more child nodes means more comparisons per level, so there will be a trade off (in specific use cases - test these)


### Hashing
- Hashing is a concept by which we convert data into a fixed size integer. This helps storage and speed when stored in a hashmap.
- The fixed size integer is called the hash code which is generated by a hash function. This functions is designed to avoid collisions as best as possible.
- A hash table / map is a key value pair store


What happens if something is tried to be stored in the hash table where something is already located? - 'Collisions'
- There are two typical methods
	- Chaining - each index in the hastable points to a linked list. This linked list is a collection of all collisions
	- Open addressing - next available slot is found if collision occurs. Common strategies for this include:
        	- Linear probing, quadratic probing or double hashing
      	- The quality of the hash function is paramount to effective use of hash tables
        	- If the hash function is poor then a lot of collisions will occur and the table can start to perform like a linked list - having to traverse over each node one by one. This turns the time complexity from O(1) to O(n) - constant time to linear time

- Linear probing - next index increment search
- Quadratic probing - next item search jumps to the next square of the number of collsions
- Double hashing - uses a second hash function as the prob step size. Better performance but more complex to implement.





  
